.TH EMP_CLIENT 6
.SH NAME
empire \- Empire client
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B empire
[
.BI \-k
]
[
.BI \-u
]
[
.BI \-2 " outfile"
]
[
.IR country
[
.IR password
]
]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I empire
is a bare bones client to connect to the Empire server.  Empire is a
global economic/political/military simulation game wherein players,
representing national governments, make "real-time" decisions
concerning resource allocation, national goals, international
diplomatic efforts, etc.  Extensive records are kept for all players.
.PP
WARNING -- This game is not only addictive but often peels back
the thin veneer of civilization that hides the maniac within.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.IR country
the name of your country in the game
.TP
.IR password
the password for your country in the game
.TP
.BI \-k
if someone else is connected to your country, kill their connection
.TP
.BI \-u
use UTF-8 rather than ASCII character set
.IP
This requires server version 4.2.21 or later, and a terminal that
understands UTF-8.
.TP
.BI \-2 " outfile"
redirect output to 
.I outfile
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
The following environment variables affect the execution of the
client:
.TP
.I EMPIREHOST
Specifies the host to connect to, i.e. where the server runs.
.TP
.I EMPIREPORT
Specifies the port number or service name to connect to.
.TP
.I COUNTRY
The name of your country in the game.
.TP
.I PLAYER
The password for your country in the game, also known as your
representative.
.TP
.I LOGNAME
Your user name.
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Primary Author is Dave Pare (mr-frog@scam.berkeley.edu)
Secondary authors/contributors may include:
James Anderson (jwa@k.cs.cmu.edu)
Jeff Anton (anton@postgres.berkeley.edu)
Phill Everson (everson@compsci.bristol.ac.uk)
Steven Grimm (koreth@ucscb.UCSC.EDU)
Lewis R. Jansen (lrj@helios.tn.cornell.edu)
Mike St. Johns (stjohns@edn-vax.arpa)
Nick Lai (lai@cs.ucla.edu)
Shelley Louie (slouie@cory.berekely.edu)
Steve McClure (ionica@empire.cx)
Chris Metcalf (metcalf-christopher@yale.arpa)
Dave Muir Sharnoff (muir@cogsci.berkeley.edu)
Keith Muller (muller@sdcc7.ucsd.edu)
Chuck Musciano (chuck@trantor.harris-atd.com)
Jeff Okamoto (okamoto%hpccc@hplabs.hp.com)
Julian Onions (jpo@computer-science.nottingham.ac.uk)
Kurt Pires (kjpires@ic.berkeley.edu)
Jim Reuter (reuter@decwrl.dec.com)
Peter Vukovich (peterv@monet.berkeley.edu)
Jeff Wallace (jeffw@scam.berkeley.edu)
John Yockey (johny@verinet.com)
