.TH EMP_SERVER 6
.\" Note: Options specific to the native Windows port are suppressed
.\" unless you format with non-zero number register w, e.g. by
.\" supplying -rw1 to nroff.
.SH NAME
emp_server \- Empire server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B emp_server
[
.B \-dhpsv
]
[
.BI \-e " configfile"
]
.if \nw \{\
.br
.B emp_server
[
.B \-i
|
.BI \-I " service-name"
]
[
.BI \-e " configfile"
]
.br
.B emp_server
[
.B \-u
|
.BI \-U " service-name"
]\}
[
.BI \-R " random-seed"
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B emp_server
is a daemon which listens to the Empire port for players connecting to
the game.  For more information on the game of Empire, see the info
pages within the game.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d 
Debug mode.  This will prevent the server from forking itself into the
background.  It will also make it abort when it detects an internal
error.  You normally want to use this flag if you are running
.B emp_server
from within a debugger.
.TP
.BI \-e " configfile"
Use game configuration in \fIconfigfile\fR.
.TP
.B \-h 
Help.  Print brief usage information and exit.
.if \nw \{\
.TP
.B \-i
Install as a Windows Service called "Empire Server".
.TP
.BI \-I " service-name"
Install as a Windows Service with the specified name.\}
.TP
.B \-p
Threading debug mode.  Implies \fB-d\fR.
.if \nw \{\
.TP
.B \-u
Uninstall the Windows Service called "Empire Server".
.TP
.BI \-U " service-name"
Uninstall the Windows Service with the specified name.\}
.TP
.B \-s
Enable thread stack checking.
.TP
.B \-R " random-seed"
Set the seed for random function.
.TP
.B \-v
Print version information and exit.
.SH OPERANDS
Operands are ignored for backward compatibility.  Their use is
deprecated.
.if !\nw \{
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Request
.B emp_server
to reopen log files and reload its configuration.  This allows proper
log rotation.  Only the update schedule is reloaded at this time.
.TP
.BR SIGINT ", " SIGTERM
Request
.B emp_server
to shut down immediately.
\}
.if \nw \{
.SH RESTRICTIONS
When using the service control manager (Services Window), the start
parameters are not processed.  The only parameters processed are the
ones supplied during service installation.  To modify the startup
parameters, you must remove the service and reinstall the service.\}
.SH BUGS
Please report all bugs to the Wolfpack <wolfpack@wolfpackempire.com>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fIempire\fR(6), \fIempsched\fR(6), \fIfairland\fR(6), \fIfiles\fR(6),
\fIpconfig\fR(6).
.SH AUTHORS
Dave Pare, Jeff Bailey, Thomas Ruschak, Ken Stevens and Steve McClure
are principal authors.  The full list of authors is too long to
include here.
