.TH EMPIRE 6
.SH NAME
empire \- Empire client
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B empire
[\fB\-hkruv\fP]
[\fB\-2\fP \fI outfile\fP]
[\fB\-s\fP \fI [host:]port\fP]
[\fIcountry\fP
[\fIpassword\fP]]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B empire
is a bare bones client to connect to the Empire server.  Empire is a
global economic/political/military simulation game wherein players,
representing national governments, make "real-time" decisions
concerning resource allocation, national goals, international
diplomatic efforts, etc.  Extensive records are kept for all players.
.PP
WARNING -- This game is not only addictive but often peels back
the thin veneer of civilization that hides the maniac within.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h
Help.  Print brief usage information and exit.
.TP
.B \-k
If someone else is connected to your country, kill their connection.
.TP
.B \-r
Restricted mode: disable redirections and execute command.
.TP
.BI \-s " [host:]port"
Specify server \fIhost\fR and \fIport\fR.
.TP
.B \-u
Use UTF-8 rather than ASCII character set.
.IP
This requires server version 4.2.21 or later, and a terminal that
understands UTF-8.
.TP
.B \-v
Print version information and exit.
.TP
.BI \-2 " outfile"
Append log of session to \fIoutfile\fR.
.SH OPERANDS
.TP
.I country
The name of your country in the game.
.TP
.I password
The password for your country in the game.
\fIWarning:\fR the password passed here is visible to other users on
the same machine!
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
The following environment variables affect the execution of the
client:
.TP
.I EMPIREHOST
Specifies the host to connect to, i.e. where the server runs.
Only effective if no host specified via \-s.
.TP
.I EMPIREPORT
Specifies the port number or service name to connect to.
Only effective if no port specified via \-s.
.TP
.I COUNTRY
The name of your country in the game.
.TP
.I PLAYER
The password for your country in the game, also known as your
representative.
.TP
.I LOGNAME
Your user name.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fIemp_server\fR(6).
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Primary Author is Dave Pare <mr-frog@scam.berkeley.edu>
Secondary authors/contributors may include:
James Anderson <jwa@k.cs.cmu.edu>
Jeff Anton <anton@postgres.berkeley.edu>
Markus Armbruster <armbru@pond.sub.org>
Phill Everson <everson@compsci.bristol.ac.uk>
Steven Grimm <koreth@ucscb.UCSC.EDU>
Lewis R. Jansen <lrj@helios.tn.cornell.edu>
Mike St. Johns <stjohns@edn-vax.arpa>
Ron Koenderink <rkoenderink@yahoo.ca>
Nick Lai <lai@cs.ucla.edu>
Shelley Louie <slouie@cory.berekely.edu>
Steve McClure <ionica@empire.cx>
Chris Metcalf <metcalf-christopher@yale.arpa>
Dave Muir Sharnoff <muir@cogsci.berkeley.edu>
Keith Muller <muller@sdcc7.ucsd.edu>
Chuck Musciano <chuck@trantor.harris-atd.com>
Jeff Okamoto <okamoto%hpccc@hplabs.hp.com>
Julian Onions <jpo@computer-science.nottingham.ac.uk>
Kurt Pires <kjpires@ic.berkeley.edu>
Jim Reuter <reuter@decwrl.dec.com>
Peter Vukovich <peterv@monet.berkeley.edu>
Jeff Wallace <jeffw@scam.berkeley.edu>
John Yockey <johny@verinet.com>
