.TH FAIRLAND 1
.SH NAME
fairland \- Empire land generator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fairland
[
.B \-ahioqv
]
[
.BI \-e " configfile"
]
[
.BI \-R " seed"
]
[
.BI \-s " scriptout"
]
.I nc
.I sc
[
.I ni
[
.I is
[
.I sp
[
.I pm
[
.I di
[
.I id
]
]
]
]
]
]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fairland
is a program which creates land and ore for Empire.  It
should be run after 
.I files 
has been run and before 
.I emp_server
has been started.  This is a land generator for empire that creates a
specified number of continents, and spaces them evenly accross the
map.  It tries to make all of them the same size, and makes sure that
they don't meet.  It gives each start island exactly the same
distribution of resources and the same number of mountains.  You can
get nearly any kind of map you want by choosing the right arguments.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-a 
mark the continents with a * so that you can tell them from the islands
.TP
.BI \-e " configfile"
Use game configuration in \fIconfigfile\fR.
.TP
.B \-h 
Help.  Print brief usage information and exit.
.TP
.B \-i
islands will crash into each other and merge
.TP
.B \-o
do not set the resources.  If you use this flag, then you will need to
run some other program (for example the 
.I ore 
program) to set the resources.
.TP
.B \-q
run quietly without printing anything to the terminal
.TP
.BI \-R " seed"
Use
.I seed
as seed for the pseudo-random number generator. This can be used to reproduce
a previously created world. (by default the current time and process id of
the server are used as seed.) The seed used to generate a world is printed
along with the map.
.TP
.BI \-s " scriptout"
writes a script for placing capitol to the file
.I scriptout
(If you don't specify this argument, then the script will be written
to "newcap_script".)
.TP
.B \-v
Print version information and exit.
.SH OPERANDS
.TP
.I nc 
number of continents
.TP
.I sc 
continent size
.TP
.I ni 
number of islands (optional, default = nc)
.TP
.I is 
average size of islands (optional, default = sc/2)
.TP
.I sp 
spike percentage: 0 = round, 100 = snake (default = 10)
.TP
.I pm 
the percentage of land that is mountain (default = 0)
.TP
.I di 
the minimum distance between continents (default = 2)
.TP
.I id 
minimum distance from islands to continents (default = 1)
.SH AUTHOR
Ken Stevens <chidren@empire.net>
