This is the basic Empire Client.

Empire is a multi-player, client/server Internet based war game.
Copyright (C) 1986-2020, Dave Pare, Jeff Bailey, Thomas Ruschak,
Ken Stevens, Steve McClure, Markus Armbruster

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License (in file
`COPYING'), or (at your option) any later version.

The client is distributed as part of the complete source tarball and
as a standalone client tarball.  The instructions below apply to the
client tarball.  If you got the complete source, as tarball or from
a git repository, refer to ../../README instead.

See file `INSTALL' for detailed compilation and installation
instructions.  Quick guide for the impatient: run configure; make;
make install.  The last step is optional; everything runs fine right
from the build tree.

If configure reports "readline: no" in its configuration summary,
fancy line editing doesn't work in the client.  Commonly caused by not
having development libraries installed.  On Linux, try installing
readline-devel.

If configure reports "terminfo: no" in its configuration summary,
highlighting doesn't work.  Commonly caused by not having development
libraries installed.  On Linux, try installing ncurses-devel.

The client connects to the Changeling blitz by default.  Use
environment variables EMPIREHOST and EMPIREPORT to connect to another
game (see manual page for details).

The client tarball is not meant for development.  Use the complete
source for that.

Please report bugs to <wolfpack@wolfpackempire.com> or via SourceForge
<http://sourceforge.net/projects/empserver/> (registration required).

For more information or help, try rec.games.empire on Usenet, or send
e-mail to <wolfpack@wolfpackempire.com> and we'll try to answer if we
can.  Also check out our web site at <http://www.wolfpackempire.com/>.

Have fun!

Wolfpack!
